Docs: Add annotations guide for data source plugins (#24432)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/developers/plugins/annotations.md

+++
title = "Add annotations to your data source plugin"
type = "docs"
+++

# Add annotations to your data source plugin

This guide explains how to add support [annotations]({{< relref "reference/annotations.md" >}}) to your data source plugin.

This guide assumes that you're already familiar with how to [Build a data source plugin]({{< relref "../../../../../tutorials/build-a-data-source-plugin.md" >}}).

> 1. Let Grafana know that your data source plugin can return annotations events, by adding `"annotations": true` to the [plugin.json]({{< relref "metadata.md" >}}) file.

Reviewer: We should put an h2 at the start of this process to hold the procedure. What I often do is use the more detailed task name for this (like what you have for your topic title) and then use a more general title for the topic.

Title: Add annotation support to plugins OR Annotation support for plugins
Task: Add support for annotations to your data source plugin

   {
     "annotations": true
   }
   ```

1. In `DataSource.ts`, override the `annotationQuery` method from `DataSourceApi`.

   ```ts
   async annotationQuery(options: AnnotationQueryRequest<MyQuery>): Promise<AnnotationEvent[]> {
       return [];
   }
   ```

1. Return an array of [AnnotationEvent]({{< relref "../../packages_api/data/annotationevent.md" >}}).

   ```ts
   async annotationQuery(options: AnnotationQueryRequest<MyQuery>): Promise<AnnotationEvent[]> {
       const events: AnnotationEvent[] = [];

       const date = new Date();

       const event: AnnotationEvent = {
         time: date.valueOf(),
         text: 'foo',
         tags: ['bar'],
       };

       events.push(event);

       return events;
   }
   ```

## Region annotations

[Region annotations]({{< relref "../../reference/annotations.md#adding-regions-events" >}}) have a start and end time. This can for example be used to annotate maintenance windows or downtime.

To return a region annotation, set the `timeEnd`, and `isRegion` properties.

```ts
const regionEvent: AnnotationEvent = {
  time: startDate.valueOf(),
  timeEnd: endDate.valueOf(),
  isRegion: true,
  text: 'foo',
  tags: ['bar'],
};
```

> ## Query editor

Reviewer: When the PR is merged, it might be worth linking to queries.md.

Let users write custom annotation queries to only display the annotation events they care about, by adding a _query editor_.

> **Note**: Annotation query editors have yet to receive support for React. The instructions here are given for Angular. Fortunately, you can run Angular even in a plugin otherwise written using React. This section will be updated once React support for annotation queries editors is available.

> 1. Create a file called `AnnotationQueryEditor.ts` in the plugin root directory, with the following content:

Reviewer: This step does not match the format of previous steps. It ends in a colon and explicitly calls out the content that follows. Other steps did not. I do not think it is necessary here, but either way works as long as you are consistent throughout.

   ```ts
   export class AnnotationQueryEditor {
     static templateUrl = 'partials/annotations.editor.html';

     annotation: any;

>      /** @ngInject */

Reviewer 2: I don't think the ngInject is necessary...

     constructor() {
       this.annotation.rawQuery = this.annotation.rawQuery || '';
     }
   }
   ```

1. Create a directory called `partials` in the plugin root directory.

   ```

>    mkdir partials

Reviewer: I'm not sure this works for Windows. I suggest testing some of these on a Windows VM or putting a note at the top that the commands are for Mac/Linux.

   ```

> 1. Create a file called `annotations.editor.html` in the `partials` directory you just created, with the following content:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a file called `annotations.editor.html` in the `partials` directory you just created. Add the following content to the file:
```

Reviewer: See above comment on step consistency, This is a bit different since it is calling out content to add into a file. You might want to split this into two steps.

1. Make the file called...
2. Add content to the file.

Reviewer: Ignore this comment if it is actually one step in the command line editors.

   ```html
   <div class="gf-form-group">
     <div class="gf-form-inline">
       <div class="gf-form gf-form--grow">
         <input
          class="gf-form-input"
          placeholder="query expression"
          ng-model="ctrl.annotation.queryText"
          ></input>
       </div>
     </div>
   </div>
   ```

> 1. In your data source query—the one that extends [DataQuery]({{< relref "../../packages_api/data/dataquery.md" >}})—add a new property `queryText`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your data source query—the one that extends [DataQuery]({{< relref "../../packages_api/data/dataquery.md" >}})—add the `queryText` property:
```

   ```
   export interface MyQuery extends DataQuery {
     // ...
     queryText?: string;
   }
   ```

>    The name of the property needs to correspond to the text in `ng-model`, e.g. `ctrl.annotation.<propertyName>`.

Reviewer: This should be before you actually name it, so before the code block.
